[mkdocs] docs: add bonded aggregate tutorial (#1773)
symbol/symbol: mkdocs/pages/en/devbook/transactions/bonded-aggregate.md

---
title: Bonded Aggregate
---

# Creating a Bonded Aggregate Transaction

This tutorial shows how to create an asset swap using <bonded aggregate transactions:>.

In this example, Account A sends 10 <XYM:> to Account B, while Account B simultaneously sends 1 custom <mosaic:> back
to Account A:

```dot
digraph {
    rankdir="LR";
    fontsize=12;
    subgraph clusterAggregate {
        label = "Bonded Aggregate Transaction";
        tooltip = "Bonded Aggregate Transaction";
        subgraph clusterT2 {
            label = "Embedded Transfer 2";
            tooltip = "Embedded Transfer 2";
            style = dashed;
            A1 [label="Account A" tooltip="Account A"];
            B1 [label="Account B" tooltip="Account B"];
            A1 -> B1 [label="1 Custom Mosaic" dir=back];
        }

>         subgraph clusterT1 {

Reviewer: Move clusterT1 before clusterT2.

            label = "Embedded Transfer 1";
            tooltip = "Embedded Transfer 1";
            style = dashed;
            A2 [label="Account A" tooltip="Account A"];
            B2 [label="Account B" tooltip="Account B"];
            A2 -> B2 [label="10 XYM"];
        }

    }
}
```

> Unlike <complete aggregate transactions:>, bonded aggregates collect <cosignatures:> on-chain.

Reviewer: Like with the Complete Aggregate tutorial, I think explaining this difference in an info box would be nice.
And also provide a concrete example where a bonded agg works better, e.g., when cosignatures have to be provided by different companies using different tools and programming languages. In this case, the blockchain acts as the common interface.

Each required party submits their cosignature directly to the network, without needing to coordinate or
communicate with the other parties off-chain.

## Prerequisites

Before you start, make sure to:

> - Set up your development environment.

Reviewer: Asterisks instead of hyphens for unordered lists.

  See [Setting Up a Development Environment](../start/setup.md).
- Create an <account:> to initiate the aggregate transaction, either
  [from code](../accounts/create-from-private-key.md) or
  [by using a wallet](../../userbook/wallet/create-account.md).

> - Obtain <XYM:> to pay for the transaction fee, transfer amounts, and the <hash lock:> deposit.

Reviewer: Would be good to explain here that the tutorial uses default testnet accounts which are already funded, but these funds will eventually run out.
And also comment on the custom mosaic, which is also pre-funded.

Author: > funds will eventually run out

Opted to not add this here since we are not doing so for any other tutorial.
Think it's best if they try to use their accounts.

---
title: Bonded Aggregate
---

# Creating a Bonded Aggregate Transaction

This tutorial shows how to create an asset swap using <bonded aggregate transactions:>.

In this example, Account A sends 10 <XYM:> to Account B, while Account B simultaneously sends 1 custom <mosaic:> back
to Account A:

```dot
digraph {
    rankdir="LR";
    fontsize=12;
    subgraph clusterAggregate {
        label = "Bonded Aggregate Transaction";
        tooltip = "Bonded Aggregate Transaction";
        subgraph clusterT1 {
            label = "Embedded Transfer 1";
            tooltip = "Embedded Transfer 1";
            style = dashed;
            A2 [label="Account A" tooltip="Account A"];
            B2 [label="Account B" tooltip="Account B"];
            A2 -> B2 [label="10 XYM"];
        }
        subgraph clusterT2 {
          label = "Embedded Transfer 2";
          tooltip = "Embedded Transfer 2";
          style = dashed;
          A1 [label="Account A" tooltip="Account A"];
          B1 [label="Account B" tooltip="Account B"];
          A1 -> B1 [label="1 Custom Mosaic" dir=back];
        }
    }
}
```

!!! note "Two types of aggregate transactions"

>     <Aggregate transactions:> group multiple <transactions:> in single operation, and require <signatures:> from all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    <Aggregate transactions:> group multiple <transactions:> in a single operation, and require <signatures:> from all
```

    involved accounts.

    A _bonded aggregate transaction_ collects signatures on-chain after being announced.

>     This works well when off-chain coordination is impractical:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This works well when off-chain coordination is impractical. For example:
```

    * **No shared infrastructure:** Parties cannot coordinate through a common system, so the blockchain serves
      as the common interface.
    * **Asynchronous workflows:** Cosigners are not available at the same time or cannot coordinate in real-time.

    To prevent spam, bonded aggregates require a *hash lock* (a deposit of 10 XYM).
    The network returns this deposit when all cosignatures arrive and the transaction reaches confirmation.

    If parties can communicate off-chain to exchange signatures, <complete aggregate transactions:> don't require this
    deposit.

## Prerequisites

Before you start, make sure to:

* Set up your development environment.
  See [Setting Up a Development Environment](../start/setup.md).
* Create an <account:> (Account A) to initiate the aggregate transaction, either
  [from code](../accounts/create-from-private-key.md) or
  [by using a wallet](../../userbook/wallet/create-account.md).
* Create a second account (Account B) to participate in the swap.
* Obtain <XYM:> for Account A to pay for the transaction fee, transfer amounts, and the hash lock deposit.
  See [Getting Testnet Funds from the Faucet](../accounts/testnet-faucet.md).

> * Create a <mosaic:> owned by Account B for the swap.

Reviewer: Same comment as for the complete agg tx tutorial regarding the length of this list and the pre-funded accounts.

* **Deadline:** The timestamp, in [network time](./transfer.md#fetching-network-time), after which the transaction
  expires and can no longer be confirmed.

* **Transactions hash:** A hash computed from all embedded transactions.
  This ensures the embedded transactions cannot be modified after signing.
  Use <dy:SymbolFacade.hashEmbeddedTransactions> to compute this value.

* **Transactions:** The array of embedded transactions to execute.

The fee is calculated based on the aggregate's total size, which includes all embedded transactions plus
space reserved for one <cosignature:> (104 bytes).

### Signing the Bonded Transaction

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:150:158', 'js:156:165']) }}

Account A signs the bonded transaction, producing the main signature and finalizing the transaction hash.

This hash is required for the next step: creating a hash lock transaction.

### Creating the Hash Lock

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:160:186', 'js:167:196']) }}

Before announcing a bonded aggregate, a hash lock transaction must be created and confirmed.
The hash lock serves as a deposit to prevent spam and ensure network resources are not exhausted by unfinished

> <partial transactions:>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<bonded aggregate transaction:|partial transactions>.
```

  cosignatures.

* **Duration:** The number of blocks the deposit remains locked (100 blocks in this example).
  If all cosignatures are collected and the bonded aggregate confirms before the duration expires,
  the deposit is returned. Otherwise, it is forfeited.

* **Hash:** The hash of the bonded aggregate transaction being locked.

The hash lock is signed using <dy:SymbolFacade.signTransaction> and announced using the `announce_transaction` helper
function.
It must be confirmed before the bonded aggregate can be announced.

Then, the `wait_for_status` helper function polls the transaction status until confirmation.

### Announcing the Bonded Transaction

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:188:196', 'js:198:204']) }}

Once the hash lock is confirmed, the bonded aggregate is announced to <put:/transactions/partial> using the
`announce_transaction` helper.

The <node:> validates the transaction, checks that a valid hash lock exists, and places it in a partial state.
The `wait_for_status` helper monitors the transaction until it reaches this state, at which point it can collect
cosignatures.

### Submitting Cosignatures

> {{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:198:252', 'js:206:267']) }}

Reviewer: This snippet is too long. As a rule of thumb, it should fit on a screen so it is easy to understand at a glance.
I would split it in 3:
1. Recovering the transaction:
    - You also need to explain that the tx hash is shared off-chain to make sure the tx we recover from the partials list is the one we want to sign, but Account B could use other means.
    - You should explain the difference between `partial_tx_hash` and `bonded_hash`. It is not clear to me.
2. Verifying it:
    - Not much to talk about, just say that this is where actual verification would happen, but we are only showing the number of embedded txes.
4. Signing it:
    - You can merge this one with the next one, Waiting for confirmation, as you did when announcing the bonded tx.

> Unlike complete aggregates where the transaction payload is shared off-chain, bonded aggregates enable true on-chain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike complete aggregates where the transaction payload is shared off-chain, bonded aggregates enable fully on-chain
```

"True" is a bit ambiguous. Also, it's not fully on-chain because we share the hash off-chain.

coordination.
Account B discovers and retrieves the partial transaction directly from the blockchain.

> First, Account B polls <get:/transactions/partial> with the `address` parameter to find transactions waiting for their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, Account B polls <get:/transactions/partial> using its own address to find transactions waiting for its
```

I'm happy calling an account "it" :)

signature.
This returns a list of partial transactions involving Account B.

Once a transaction is found, Account B uses its hash to fetch the full details (including embedded transactions) from
<get:/transactions/partial/{transactionId}>.

After verifying the transaction content, Account B cosigns it using <dy:SymbolFacade.cosignTransactionHash> with the

> transaction hash and the `detached` parameter set to `true` (Python) or passed as the third argument (JavaScript).

Reviewer: You are describing here what the code does, which is fine, but it's more important to explain _why_.

So what is this `detached` parameter that you talk about? Why do we need it set to true? When would we set it to false?
This is the added value of the text descriptions, because this info is not in the code.

Also, no need to give Python and JS details. Just mention the parameter name, and readers can click on the method name to find it.

with Account B's signature.

The cosignature is submitted using the `announce_transaction` helper function to <put:/transactions/cosignature>.
The network validates the cosignature and attaches it to the partial transaction.

Once enough cosignatures are collected to satisfy all embedded transactions,
the network automatically processes the bonded aggregate and includes it in a block.

### Waiting for Confirmation

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:254:258', 'js:269:272']) }}

After the cosignature is submitted, the `wait_for_status` helper function polls
<get:/transactionStatus/{hash}> until the transaction is confirmed or fails.

If all required cosignatures are collected before the deadline, the transaction confirms, both transfers execute,
and the hash lock deposit is returned to Account A.

If the deadline expires or any cosignature is invalid, the transaction fails and the deposit is forfeited.

## Output

The output shown below corresponds to a typical run of the program.

```text linenums="1" hl_lines="14 18 48 51 55 63 66 68 70 72"
--8<-- 'devbook/transactions/bonded-aggregate.log'
```

> Key points in the output:

Reviewer: Include line numbers.

You also need two <accounts:> with <XYM:> and one custom <mosaic:> to complete the swap.
Although pre-funded accounts are provided for convenience, they are not maintained and may run out of funds.

To use your own accounts, complete the following steps:

* Create an account (Account A) to initiate the aggregate transaction, either
  [from code](../accounts/create-from-private-key.md) or
  [by using a wallet](../../userbook/wallet/create-account.md).
* Create a second account (Account B) to participate in the swap.
* Obtain XYM for Account A to pay for the transaction fee, transfer amounts, and the hash lock deposit.
  See [Getting Testnet Funds from the Faucet](../accounts/testnet-faucet.md).
* Create a mosaic owned by Account B for the swap.

Additionally, review the [Transfer transaction](./transfer.md) tutorial to understand how
transactions are announced and confirmed.

## Full Code

{% import 'tutorial.jinja2' as tutorial with context %}

{{ tutorial.code_full('devbook/transactions/bonded-aggregate', ['py', 'js']) }}

The whole code is wrapped in a single `try` block to provide simple error handling,
but applications will probably want to use more fine-grained control.

> ## Account A: Initiator Workflow

Author: @segfaultxavi Split "Code explanation" in:

```
## Account A: Initiator Workflow

## Account B: Cosigner Workflow
```

To make it easier to follow.

But, removed "Code explanation" to keep it 3 levels max.

Reviewer: Good idea!

### Verifying the Transaction

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:221:231', 'js:245:256']) }}

Once a transaction is found, Account B uses its hash to fetch the full details (including embedded transactions) from
<get:/transactions/partial/{transactionId}>.

Before cosigning, Account B should verify that the embedded transactions match the expected operations.
This example simply logs the number of embedded transactions, but it could also check amounts,
recipients, and mosaics to ensure the swap terms are correct.

!!! warning "Verify before cosigning"

    Always inspect transaction content before cosigning.
    Cosignatures are binding and cannot be undone.

### Cosigning the Transaction

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:233:248', 'js:257:273']) }}

Account B cosigns the transaction using <dy:SymbolFacade.cosignTransactionHash> with the transaction hash and the
`detached` parameter set to `true`.

A detached cosignature is a standalone object that can be submitted independently to the network.
This is required for bonded aggregates because the cosigner submits directly to the node.

The resulting detached cosignature payload includes:

* **Version:** The cosignature format version.

> * **Signer pubic key:** Account B's public key, identifying who cosigned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Signer public key:** Account B's public key, identifying who cosigned.
```
